Adding installation instructions to documentation (#1403)
OceanParcels/parcels: docs/installation.rst

Basic installation
==================

The simplest way to install the Parcels code is to use Anaconda and the `Parcels conda-forge package <https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/parcels>`_ with the latest release of Parcels. This package will automatically install all the requirements for a fully functional installation of Parcels. This is the “batteries-included” solution probably suitable for most users. If you want to install the latest development version of Parcels and work with features that have not yet been officially released, you can follow the instructions for a `developer installation <#installation-for-developers>`_.

The steps below are the installation instructions for Linux / macOS and for Windows. If the commands for Linux / macOS and Windows differ, this is indicated with a comment at the end of the line.

#. Install Anaconda's Miniconda following the steps at https://conda.io/docs/user-guide/install/, making sure to select the Python-3 version. If you're on Linux /macOS, it also assumes that you installed Miniconda-3 to your home directory.

> #. Start a terminal (Linux / macOS) or the Anaconda prompt (Windows). Activate the root (or base) environment of your Miniconda and create an environment containing Parcels, all its essential dependencies, and the nice-to-have cartopy and jupyter packages:
> 
>     .. code-block:: bash
> 
>       conda activate root  # Linux / macOS
>       activate root        # Windows
> 
>       conda create -n parcels -c conda-forge parcels cartopy

Reviewer: Is root used for Anaconda? First I've heard of it; maybe something from older versions, or is it specific to Miniconda? Maybe worth just mentioning `base`?

```suggestion
#. Start a terminal (Linux / macOS) or the Anaconda prompt (Windows). Activate the ``base`` environment of your Miniconda and create an environment containing Parcels, all its essential dependencies, and the nice-to-have cartopy and jupyter packages:

    .. code-block:: bash

      conda activate base
      conda create -n parcels -c conda-forge parcels cartopy
```

    .. note::

>         For some of the examples, ``pytest`` needs to be installed with ``conda install -n parcels pytest``

Reviewer: Clarification (1. I was unfamliar with `-n` in `conda install`, and 2. previously may have been misread as `conda install parcels pytest` which installs `parcels` and `pytest`).

```suggestion
        For some of the examples, ``pytest`` also needs to be installed. This can be quickly done with ``conda install -n parcels pytest`` which installs ``pytest`` directly into the newly created ``parcels`` environment.
```

> #. Activate the newly created Parcels environment:
> 
>     .. code-block:: bash
> 
>       conda activate parcels  # Linux / macOS
>       activate parcels        # Windows</code></pre>

Reviewer: See other comment.

```suggestion
#. Activate the newly created Parcels environment by typing ``conda activate parcels``.
```

Author: Good point about using `condo activate` in all cases, but I prefer to show it in a `code-block`

#. Get a zipped copy of the Parcels tutorials and examples from `here <https://docs.oceanparcels.org/en/latest/_downloads/307c382eb1813dc691e8a80d6c0098f7/parcels_tutorials.zip>`_ and unzip it.

#. Go to the unzipped folder and run one of the examples to validate that you have a working Parcels setup:

    .. code-block:: bash

      python example_peninsula.py --fieldset 100 100

    .. note::
      If you are on macOS and get a compilation error, you may need to accept the Apple xcode license ``xcode-select --install``. If this does not solve the compilation error, you may want to try running ``export CC=gcc``. If the compilation error remains, you may want to check `this solution <https://stackoverflow.com/a/58323411/5172570>`_.

#. Optionally, if you want to run all the examples and tutorials, start Jupyter and open the tutorial notebooks:

    .. code-block:: bash

      jupyter notebook

> #. The next time you start a terminal and want to work with Parcels, activate the environment with:
> 
>     .. code-block:: bash
> 
>       conda activate parcels  # Linux / macOS
>       activate parcels        # Windows

Reviewer: `activate ...` works in Windows, but I feel that its non-standard compared to `conda activate ...` which also works for Windows.

```suggestion
#. The next time you start a terminal and want to work with Parcels, activate the environment by typing ``conda activate parcels``.
```

Author: Good point about using `condo activate` in all cases, but I prefer to show it in a `code-block`

Installation for developers
===========================

> Parcels depends on a working Python installation, a netCDF installation, a C compiler, and various Python packages. If you prefer to maintain your own Python installation providing all this, download one of the environment files for `linux <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OceanParcels/parcels/master/environment_py3_linux.yml>`_, for `macOS <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OceanParcels/parcels/master/environment_py3_osx.yml>`_ or for `Windows <https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OceanParcels/parcels/master/environment_py3_win.yml>`_ and install it with:
> 
>     .. code-block:: bash
> 
>       git clone https://github.com/OceanParcels/parcels.git
>       conda env create -f environment_py3_<OS>.yml  # where <OS> is either linux, osx or win

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the wording of this section. Is it necessary to include info on downloading the environment files? (they would be in the clone anyway). Perhaps something along the line of 

```suggestion
If you would prefer to have a development installation of Parcels (i.e., where the code can be actively editted), you can do so by cloning the Parcels repo, installing dependencies using the environment file (which includes Python, netCDF tooling, a C compiler, and various Python packages), and then installing Parcels in an editable mode such that changes to the cloned code can be tested during development.

    .. code-block:: bash

      git clone https://github.com/OceanParcels/parcels.git
      conda env create -f environment_py3_<OS>.yml  # where <OS> is either linux, osx or win
```

Then, add the directory where you stored the Parcels code to your ``$PYTHONPATH`` environment variable. For example, if you cloned the Parcels code to ``/home/username/parcels``, add the following line to your ``.bashrc`` or ``.zshrc`` file:

    .. code-block:: bash

>       export PYTHONPATH=/home/username/parcels:$PYTHONPATH

Reviewer: Havent extensively tested, `pip install -e /home/username/parcels` seems to work. How does this approach differ? I'm a bit hesitant to directly modify `PYTHONPATH`

Author: OK, I now added `pip install -e .` as default option (this was actually suggested too by Github Copilot); but want to keep the `$PYTHONPATH` option as a fall-back (in the past I've had issues with `pip install`)

Reviewer: Doing a quick search, I come acrross [this SO article](https://stackoverflow.com/a/49478207) going over developper installation for Conda packages using `conda develop .` ([see help documentation for `conda develop`](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/main/resources/commands/conda-develop.html)).

Has this route been investigated? Happy to do some further investigating if not.

Part of my hesitancy for `$PYTHONPATH` is mainly since I'm not sure how that would affect other Conda environments (i.e. globally "installing" it into all conda/python environments?).

Author: OK thanks for digging into this. I can confirm that `pip install --no-build-isolation --no-deps -e .` also seems to work on my system. Have updated it now in the instructions
